# Initial_Project_Report_on_Fi_Sci_Directe

Converted from: Initial_Project_Report_on_Fi_Sci_Directe.pdf
Date: 2025-08-19

---

Initial Project Report on Fi-Sci: Directed Entertainment Narrative
Generation for Scientific and Technological Research
Alexis Kirke, Eduardo Miranda, Plymouth University, UK

“To raise new questions, new possibilities, to regard old problems from a new angle,
requires creative imagination and marks real advance in science.” (Einstein and Infeld, 1938)
Most scientists would agree with this, and would also say fiction writing is a more creative
process than generating a scientific project proposal. There are multiple examples of Science
Fiction writers inspiring and even predicting genuine future technologies, for example the
satellites of Arthur C. Clarke (Rhodes, 2000), and the social robotics of Isaac Asimov
(Asimov, 1950). There has also been a European Space Agency project which surveys past
science fiction to help with the generation and development of new ideas for space
technology (Rait, 2001), Recently a study began on how reading fiction might affect
scientists (Knight, Dillon and Goldschmidt, 2012) and there has been research on using
Science Fiction to help teach science (Dubek, et al., 1990). More tangentially, there has been
a study on the use of cyberpunk novels in geographical research (Kitchin and Neal, 2001).
This article introduces a novel approach to generating or extending research projects, called
Fiscience (pronounced “fiss-see-ense”). Fiscience (or Fi-Sci for short) involves the
generation of entertainment narratives at different stages of a science research project so as to
explore and produce new ideas which the project can investigate. Fi-Sci differs from past
approaches in being active and direct: new fictional story ideas are developed by fiction
writers in relation to science projects, to help with, extend or initiate the scientists’ ideas.

Method Overview
The core method being investigated involves the use of three science projects in
which the authors are involved (described in more detail later). One of these projects has been

2

funded by the UK EPSRC for £1.1m, the second project proposal failed to attain EPSRC
funding in its current form and is being rewritten, the third solely exists as some notes, an
informal published article and web page, and a draft paper in preparation. By using these
three is is hoped to examine how the input of science fiction authors may help with projects
at different stages in their life cycle. For example the first – already funded – project could at
some future point have trouble achieving its objectives. Hence a set of ideas generated by
fiction writers may help the scientists to think outside of their mental habits in progressing
the project. Furthermore it may provide fruitful pathways for further research.
For the second project, the input of the science fiction authors may help in giving a
new context, defining more clearly the social impact plan, and / or perhaps extending the
level of innovation. This may lead to the project being more suitable for a successful funding
bid. Finally for the hardly-defined project, the input of the science fiction authors may help to
give more direction, and to highlight the key elements of the project to be incorporated into a
funding application.
Broadly the method involves contacting multiple professional sci-fi authors and
asking them to generate story pitches (in the form of at most one to two paragraphs per story
pitch) based on one or more of the three research projects. The pitch is a short summary of
their story which captures its essence. The authors are encouraged to generate “ideas-based”
stories, not ones which are more focused on character. These ideas will then be evaluated, by
scientists collaborating on the projects, for their potential application within the three projects.

Initial Contact Process
A number of professional authors of speculative/science-fiction were contacted and
given a brief outline of the Fi-Sci idea, including one sentence descriptions of the three
research projects. Of those contacted a minority responded asking for more details. This part

3

of the process raised some key issues. One author asked “Who owns the copyright to the
pitches?” This raised an issue that had not been considered – intellectual property, one that is
now in the process of being investigated. The initial response was:

“There would be two separate elements: (1) Any story coming from the pitches
would belong to the author; (2) Any research or technology coming from the
pitches would belong to Plymouth University – however the authors would be
credited as a research paper author in any journal, conference or media
publication.”

Another question which arose from an author:

“When you say you're looking for ‘ideas-driven’ stories it makes me wonder
what you actually imagine the writers would contribute, as you have listed the
‘ideas’ below and what seems to be required next is characters and plot. I
don't imagine that characters and plot would get you anywhere scientifically,
so please clarify what you are hoping for from the writers.”

The following response was sent to the author as an example:

“Suppose a project was being developed in which computers are being used to
diagnose mental illness using artificial intelligence questions and interaction.
This would be the research idea. A crime author may be inspired to develop a
short story / novel in which somebody wished to discredit a business associate
who had a mild depressive illness. The criminal hacks into the system and sets

4

it up so that it will diagnose the person they wish to discredit with, say a
majorly delusional mental illness such as schizophrenia. The computer system
is the research idea, the crime story is the story idea inspired by the research
idea. Reading the idea for the crime story might lead scientists to more
carefully incorporate ethical and network security concerns into their
research on the system. Thus the plan for the fiction impacts the plan for the
science. I find both the fictional and scientific examples above to not be
particularly interesting (or realistic)! However, do they highlight the
differences between the initial science idea and the story idea for you?”

At this point a responding author would agree to join the project or decline. The profile of
joining authors thus far is given in Table 1.

Author ID Occupation
1

2

3

4

First key Location Work examples
publication
Film
script 2011
UK
Horror script filmed
writer
starring Billy Zane and
Dominic Purcell
Theatre
and 1997
UK
Robot script for BBC
radio
script
Radio 4 and iconic
writer
BBC sci-fi series work
Novelist
2008
USA
Multiple sci-fi books,
recently nominated for
a John W. Campbell
Award
Novelist
2010
USA
Multiple sci-fi books
one winning an Arthur
C. Clarke award

Table 1: Some features of the four confirmed authors

5

Short Project Description Phase
Authors were sent short project descriptions and asked to order the projects by
preference. The descriptions were as follows:

Project 1: Real-Time Hallucination Simulation and Sonification through UserLed Development of an iPad Augmented Reality System
The simulation of visual hallucinations has multiple applications. For example
in helping diagnosis, in helping patients to express themselves and reduce their
sense of isolation, for medical education, and in legal proceedings for damages
due to eye / brain injuries. A new approach to hallucination simulation is
presented, which allows real-time expression, using an iPad. An individual can
overlay their hallucinations in real-time on the iPad screen over the iPad’s
video camera image. The system has been developed focusing on the visual
symptoms of Palinopsia, experienced by the first author, and hence is initially
user-led research. However such an approach can be utilised for other
conditions and visual hallucination types. The system also allows the
hallucinations to be converted into sound through visual sonification, thus
providing another avenue for expression for the hallucinating individual.
Furthermore, a musical performance is described which uses the system, and
which has helped to raise awareness and comfort some people who have
Palinopsia symptoms.

Project

2:

Intelligent

Communicating Whales

Multi-agent

System

Informed

by

Imitative

6

The development of intelligent machines that evolve collectively their own
language to execute tasks in groups by interacting with each other, and with
people, is a challenging problem, which is currently being addressed by
scientists worldwide. An innovative and interdisciplinary approach to this
challenge is proposed, which combines Artificial Intelligence, Cognitive
Science, Marine Biology and Computer Music to develop a communication
system based on the evolution of Humpback whale song in social groups. An
audio hierarchical grammar will be learned and shared between agents and/or
between agents and humans. The modelling of singing whales will provide
insight into the processes of cultural transmission in whales and into the
learning of language and communication in the wider biological field. In order
to develop this research the consortium’s combined interdisciplinary expertise
into modelling of musical evolution, machine learning, multi-agent modelling,
and analysis and modelling of the behaviour of schools of whales will be
drawn upon.

Project 3: Brain-Computer Interface for Monitoring and Inducing Affective
States
It is proposed to extend our work in how EEG-based emotion detection can be
used to control affective communication via sound using computational
affective expressive performances of algorithmically composed music. This
will be a system in which affective music is composed and expressively
performed in real-time, based on the detection of affective state in a human
listener. Machine learning algorithms will learn: (1) how to use EEG and other
biosensors to detect the user’s current emotional state; and (2) how to use

7

algorithmic performance and composition to induce certain affective
trajectories. In other words the system will attempt to adapt so that it can – in
real-time - turn a certain user from depressed to happy, or from stressed to
relaxed, or (if they like horror movies!) from relaxed to fearful.

Once an author had ordered these by preference they were sent the main
documentation for their preferred project. For Project 3 it was the project proposal which
raised the EPSRC funding, for Project 2 it was the project proposal which was rejected for
funding, and for Project 1 it was the informal written article and web page. Authors generate
their story pitches based solely on these documents. No fixed timescale was given, authors
are told to just write when they were “inspired” to.

Initial Response Overview
Not all four authors have responded at this stage, and the responses are still being
collated. Also further authors are joining the Fi-Sci project while these other authors are
responding. The project-participant author responses have varied in enthusiasm so far. One
author responded enthusiastically to two items, in detail, and without even asking to see the
main project documents. Another author responded with a single project preference, the main
project document was sent to them and they have not responded at all to this. A final author
was sent the project document and said they were finding it a real struggle, but responded
with a story idea.

Next Steps
The evaluation of the authors’ responses has already begun including sending the
responses out to other scientists who have collaborated with Plymouth on the three projects.

8

Another batch of professional sci-fi authors have been contacted, as even after an author has
joined the project, their enthusiasm of response varies. Once it has been confirmed which of
this batch are joining the Fi-Sci project and having received responses from all authors (or
confirmed if they have changed their mind about responding), there will be collation of
evaluations by the participating scientists and a resulting publishable research report. A large
research institute has expressed a strong interest in using the Fi-Sci approach to brainstorm a
new batch of research grant proposals for their institute. This would help to provide further
data for the utility of the Fi-Sci approach.

Conclusion
A new approach to initiating and developing science projects has been presented. In
this approach speculative/science fiction authors are presented with scientific project
descriptions at various stages in development and asked to freely develop descriptions for
new ideas-based stories, based around the project descriptions. The aim is to examine if such
story descriptions can contribute towards the science projects themselves. A number of
inspirational links between fiction and science are well documented, however this is the first
project which attempts to formalise the inclusion of fiction writers in the scientific process
with a relatively fixed approach, and across different types of projects, involving multiple
authors.

Appendix
Below are actual responses, received from author 2 (Projects 2 to 4) and author 4
(Project 2). Author 2 addressed two of the three core projects. However, a semi-playful
suggestion was also made by the Fi-Sci team that authors may wish to come up with stories
about the Fi-Sci project itself, and author 2 responded to this suggestion as well.

9

Fi-Sci responses to Research Projects proposed by Alexis Kirke

Project 2: Intelligent Multi-agent System Informed by Imitative Communicating Whales
Story Idea by Anita Sullivan (Author 2)
The Nano-bots’ Story. A laboratory group of simple nano-bots that are given preprogrammed physical tasks: complete a maze, carry an object from one point to another, open
a door etc. They are also able to verbalise using digital sounds derived from whale song.
They have ‘ears’ that sense audio vibrations. After running the experiment continually with
the same group, the nano-bots’ begin to respond...
1) The nano-bots start to develop a basic system of signals (left, right, here, away, up,
down). They begin to collaborate on tasks that would be too difficult for one nano-bot
to complete alone (e.g. tripping a see-saw, carrying a heavy object, reaching an object
that requires them to climb on each other). Conclusion: language doesn’t just enable
intelligence, it creates it.
2) Experimentally, a system is set up where individual nano-bots become randomly
separated from the group. The isolated nano-bot ‘calls’ to the group. The group ‘calls’
back. Not only that, each nano-bot has its own call-sign. It has given itself a ‘name’
and has an identity that the group recognises. Conclusion: language creates self and
social place.
3) Continuing the experiment, the researchers withdraw all tasks from the nano-bots.
With nothing to do it is assumed they will stop communicating. In fact what happens
is they break into smaller fluid groupings and ‘burble’. The communication cannot be
about physical actions as the nano-bots have no physical needs and no programmed

10

tasks. They appear to be ‘just chatting’. But what about? Conclusion: language creates
abstract thought.
4) In the next experiment, the researchers combine one established group of nano-bots
with another. These two groups have applied their sound-systems in different ways:
they speak different languages. When first set a task, the two groups cannot
collaborate and stay separate. But gradually, through the process of achieving goals,
the two groups learn each others’ languages. (They speak more simply and loudly to
members of the foreign group!) During rest periods, the nano-bots generally
reassemble in their old groups. Conclusion: Language creates division and
connection/ group identity.
5) In the final experiment, the researchers play synthesised whale song to the nano bots.
The nano-bots have an instant and profound reaction. They howl. Do they dislike the
music? Are they interpreting the whale song as unhappy? Or has the whale song told
them of a world they cannot comprehend, beyond the tasks of the laboratory where
creatures think and move freely. Conclusion: language creates imagination... misery
and hope.
Project 3: Brain-Computer Interface for Monitoring and Inducing Affective States
Story Idea by Anita Sullivan (Author 2)
Four alternative scenarios:
1) Prisons/ Youth Custody Centre. Emotional Inducers are used on violent and
antisocial prisoners in an attempt to modify behaviour. The EI Headphones seem to
work but have some interesting side-effects. Where one prisoner in a section is using
them it seems to have a local effect on other prisoners too, suggesting a collective bio-

11

rhythm where people are closely confined. Most subjects seem to enjoy their altered
state and comply with the EI programme happily, but a minority find it disturbing and
their stress levels elevate. The story could explore what happens if the EI Headphones
are over-used. Are there permanent changes to a person’s responses? Is there a
rebound effect when the EI headphones are removed?
2) Phobias/ PTS. Emotional Inducers are used during aversion-therapy work with
phobic people and patients with Post Traumatic Stress. The EI headphones initially
allow desensitisation. But then the music created by the calm bio-response are used to
create a personal EI therapy tape. This can be used to help the patient through phobic
situations and stress triggers. For example, a Calm Flight EI product is on the market
to help passengers overcome fear of flying. The story could explore what happens if
someone uses EI tapes in a moment of genuine danger where a flight-or-flight
response would normally be triggered. Does the EI suppress this response? What is
the outcome?
3) Hospices. Emotional Inducers are used to assist patients close to death. Using the EI
headphones enables patients to reduce their reliance on pain-management medication
and face their final hours in a calmer, more lucid state. It is observed that the music
continues for some minutes after respiratory death, while brain function continues.
One doctor makes a study of these phenomena. The ‘point of death’ music for all
patients is found to be remarkably similar. Is the music an attempt at communication?
Does this have religious significance? Or is it just the way the electrical charges in the
brain decay organically?
4) Non-Communicants. Emotional Inducers are made available to people who cannot
use language to communicate. Examples might be people with a learning disability or

12

physical impairment that means they are unable to speak/ comprehend speech. When
they are wearing the EI system, their bio-music can be played to carers allowing them
to interpret how the subject is feeling and what they need. The story could explore
how a particular subject seems to be able to adjust their body responses in order to use
the EI system to communicate. They play bio-music rather than using words.
Project 4: Recursive Response to Fi-Sci Project
Story Idea by Anita Sullivan (Author 2)
‘A Warning to the Curious’.
In the short stories of M R James everyday objects (a whistle, a picture, a snuff-box) develop
unnatural and disturbing powers over people, unlocking malevolent forces. The person’s
emotional reaction to the object dictates the strength of its power.
In this story, two writers develop Fi-Sci storylines in response to one of the research projects.
One writer poses a positive outcome, a positive future. The other tells a story with a negative
outcome, offers a warning to the curious: do not meddle with things you don’t fully
understand. The researchers read both stories. As a response, their line of research is cautious,
kerbed by the warning. The warning becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy and the outcome of
the work is perceived to be unsatisfactory, perhaps negative. In fact, one of the researchers
finds something deeply malevolent in the work, a reflection of his/ her own fears.
Conclusion: observation changes the observed, prophesy finds a way of fulfilling itself.
Project 2: Intelligent Multi-agent System Informed by Imitative Communicating Whales
Story Idea by Tricia Sullivan (Author 4)
‘The song who swam’

13

In the posthuman future a sophisticated machine-based social intelligence has developed
from humble origins in the transliterated found grammars of whale song. Most human affairs
are now controlled by and dependent on the spacefaring Undersystem. Nala is a separable
member of this collective, able to slip in and out of individuality. Her personal function
involves introducing nonhuman species to the Undersystem, and she has been assigned to
resolve a problem with whales.
A group of humpbacks has been engineered for interface with the Undersystem in the
expectation that their species can become involved in planetary matters at a decision-making
level. But the engineered whales are having difficulty competing ecologically with aboriginal
whales, an unexpected result considering the advantages conferred by Undersystem access.
One political faction is suggesting that aboriginal whale populations be limited in order to
accommodate the engineered whales. Nala wants to avoid this kind of intervention, but she
can’t rely on the engineered whales to diagnose their own problem because they lack the
necessary intellectual sophistication. So she takes a leap of faith. She uses postbiological
interface methods to split herself from the Undersystem and embed her own consciousness
within an aboriginal whale. She intends only to listen, so she chooses a female host.
Inside the whale’s body she realises that the structures which comprise her own Undersystem
consciousness have been abstracted from whale song by ripping them away from their
physical associations and are therefore devoid of useful content from the whales’ point of
view. Because the Undersystem’s evolution occurred largely through computer systems and
(usually visual) machine sensory feedback systems, the Undersystem has little awareness of
underwater aural conditions nor of the embodied consciousness of the whales whose songs it
borrowed without understanding.

14

As she begins to learn the aboriginal whales’ culture from the inside, Nala discovers that the
engineered whales and the aboriginal whales cannot make sense of one another. The song of
the engineered whales has been programmed by the Undersystem; although it shares a
grammar with aboriginal whalesong, it is ridiculed by the aboriginal whales as nonsensical.
Its ‘noise’ occasions hostility from aboriginal whales who are annoyed by its interference in
their business. The engineered whales are thus isolated from the group consciousness of the
aboriginal whales, and they are failing to reproduce successfully because they can no longer
make use of the song culture that nourishes, informs and brings coherence to groups within
the species.
After a time spent as a whale, Nala finds her consciousness being reshaped by her
embodiment within the humpback whale. By the time she has mated, given birth to a calf,
and nurtured it to maturity, her whole way of thinking and communicating has changed.
With the threat of a cull looming, she tries to reconnect to the Undersystem to communicate
her findings and urge a change in policy toward the whale program, but she can’t articulate
what the Undersystem needs to know in terms that it can understand. For its own part, the
Undersystem believes she has gone native and lost the plot.
Project 1: Real-Time Hallucination Simulation and Sonification through User-Led
Development of an iPad Augmented Reality System
Story Idea by Caroline Riley (Author 1)
What prevents us from passing from this dimension to the next, our resistance to believe or
our inability to see? There are those who while still awake can move between these worlds.
Some might consider them crazy, others old and senile but they are our link to the next world.
After crashing a stolen car Ruth an uneducated young woman lacking in purpose is sentenced
to community service at a local nursing home. As part of her induction she is given the

15

opportunity to try an educational visionary device, programmed to allow the wearer to view
the world from the perspective of those suffering different medical disorders. To start with
Ruth is uninterested in the home and its residents. However, the situation changes when she
meets an elderly lady called Claire who has suffered a stroke. During their conversation
Claire reveals that in a waking dream her condition allows her to visit a parallel world similar
to our own but she warns, if the cord that connects the spirit to the body is broken you are
unable to return.
Ruth tells her deadbeat drug dealing boyfriend about Claire, he laughs and tells her the old
woman must be mad. He suggests that if Ruth wants to join her she should take DMT, a drug
that can induce a similar dream like state. The next day to Ruth's horror, she discovers Claire
in a trance and is unable to wake her. Ruth decides she must try and save Claire; she steals
the visionary aid and takes the drug. Much to her surprise she slips into the next world but
what she finds is much darker and more sinister than she could have ever imagined.

Bibliography
Asimov, I., 1950. I, Robot. Gnome Press: New York.
Dubek, L., Bruce, M., Schmucker, J., Moshier, S. and Boss, J., 1990. Science Fiction aids
Science Teaching. The Physics Teacher, 28(5), pp.316-318.
Einstein, A. and Infeld, L., 1938. The Evolution of Physics, Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge
Kitchin, R. and Kneale, J., 2001. Science Fiction or Future Fact? Exploring Imaginative
Geographies of the New Millennium. Human Geography, 25(1), pp.19-35.
Knight, C., Dillon, S., Goldschmidt, P. and Padgett, M., 2012. What Scientists Read. [online]
Available at: < http://www.whatscientistsread.com/> [Accessed 19 July 2012 ].

16

Rait, D., 2001. Innovative Technologies from Science Fiction for space applications,
Preparing for the Future. 11:1, pp.6-7.
Rhodes, R., ed., 1999. Visions of Technology. New York: Simon and Schuster.

